# Adoptee Birth Date: 4-5-1963 (10:34 p.m.)Adoptee Gender: FemaleAdoptee Birth Race: WhiteName given to Adoptee by Birth Parents: Cheryl Renee Womack Adoptee Birth City: Pasadena, TXAdoptee Birth County: Harris CountyAdoptee Birth State: TexasAdoptee Birth Country: USAAdoptee Birth Mothers Name: ? Womack ?Adoptee Birth Mothers Maiden Name: Womack ?Adoptee Birth Mothers Race: WhiteAdoptee Birth Fathers Name: ? Womack ?Adoptee Birth Fathers Race: WhiteAdoptee Birth Hospital: Southmore Hospital and ClinicAdoption Agency or Attorney: Henry G. Schubble, III - Attorney and Counselor at LawAge of Adoptee when Adopted: Given up at birthName given to Adoptee by Adoptive Parents: Cheryl Rene BradfordCity adoption took place: Houston, TXCounty adoption took place: Harris CountyState adoption took place: TexasCountry Adoption took place: USAAdoptive Mothers Name: Mary M. Bradford (Deceased)Adoptive Mothers Maiden Name: StrawnAdoptive Fathers Name: Luther Thomas Bradford (Deceased)Email Address: cheryl_bradford@sbcglobal.netSearching For: Birth Parents, Birth Family, Medical History.All Other Information: Adoption was through an attorney. I believe my birth mother or birth father's last name was Womack as my adoptive parent's remembered that name was spoken during the formal adoption. I am not sure on this though. Looking for birth family. It has taken me many years to get to the place to reach out and try to find my birth mother and family........fear of being rejected or of finding out I waited too long. Please know that adoption is the most loving act a birth mother can do for their child when they are not ready or capable at the time to raise a child. I have never met an adopted person who did not have a loving home. My own adoptive parents who have now passed were the most incredible loving parents ever. They loved children so much that even after the heartbreak of miscarriages, a still born birth and losing a child in just a few days of life they continued to try to have children and finally were able to adopt. So, I just want you to know that if you are looking at this and in search of a missing piece of your heart know your child loves you even without ever meeting you. May the Lord bless you in your search, as I pray I am blessed in my own. (Update) I am 5'5" tall, I have brown eyes and brown hair. I do not know anything about my birth parents.Date Received: 7-2-2012Date Posted: 7-2-2012Last Updated: 7-16-2012