# Adoptee Birth Date: 6-12-1963Adoptee Gender: MaleAdoptee Birth Race: CaucasianName given to Adoptee by Birth Parents: NoneAdoptee Birth City: Dallas, TXAdoptee Birth County: Dallas CountyAdoptee Birth State: TexasAdoptee Birth Country: USAAdoptee Birth Mothers Name: Edna Elizabeth Stogner (Deceased)Adoptee Birth Mothers Maiden Name: StognerAdoptee Birth Mothers Race: CaucasianAdoptee Birth Fathers Name: Marc HillAdoptee Birth Fathers Race: CaucasianAdoptee Birth Hospital: Baylor Medical CenterAdoption Agency or Attorney: ?Age of Adoptee when Adopted: Given up at birthName given to Adoptee by Adoptive Parents: ?City adoption took place: ?, TX ?County adoption took place: ?State adoption took place: Texas ?Country Adoption took place: USAAdoptive Mothers Name: ?Adoptive Mothers Maiden Name: ?Adoptive Fathers Name: ?Email Address: msettle1@verizon.netSearching For: Adoptee, Birth NephewAll Other Information: My sister, Elizabeth Stogner, was impregnated by a neighbor boy. She was sent to the Edna Gladney Home in either Irving or Fort Worth, Texas while Pregnant. She gave birth to a 7 lb. 6 ounce baby boy on 6-6-1963. I was the only family member to see the infant. The baby was taken away from her before she had a chance to see him. My sister Elizabeth was brain damaged at birth and while not retarded had motor disabilities that made it difficult for her to maintain her balance and speech. She was injured during a forcep delivery and never got married. I would like to find this child who by now would be 48 years old. When I saw him he was a beautiful little boy with brown curly hair. He may likely have blue eyes. There would be no reason to believe that he had genetic health problems. We were told at the time that he had been adopted by a couple who was living in Irving, Texas but that may just be a rumor. I would like to meet him to tell him about his birth mother and other cousins if he wants. My sister Elizabeth was one of 7 children, the third. She died in 1997, two days before the death of our mother with whom she lived her entire life. Eliabeth was a sweet and loving person who never had a chance to see her baby boy. She was never allowed to speak of him in her lifetime. But, I did get to see this little baby in his crib in the hallway at Baylor Hospital on Gaston Avenue in Dallas, Texas. I would like to meet him before I die. He still has one uncle and 5 living aunts at this time and numerous cousins.Date Received: 9-12-2011Date Posted: 9-27-2011Last Updated: 11-29-2011 & 9-27-2011