# Adoptee Birth Date: ?-?-1962 ?Adoptee Gender: MaleAdoptee Birth Race: WhiteName given to Adoptee by Birth Parents: ?Adoptee Birth City: ?, TXAdoptee Birth County: ?Adoptee Birth State: TexasAdoptee Birth Country: USAAdoptee Birth Mothers Name: Davis Sue MusgroveAdoptee Birth Mothers Maiden Name: MusgroveAdoptee Birth Mothers Race: WhiteAdoptee Birth Fathers Name: ?Adoptee Birth Fathers Race: White ?Adoptee Birth Hospital: ?Adoption Agency or Attorney: ?Age of Adoptee when Adopted: InfantName given to Adoptee by Adoptive Parents: ?City adoption took place: ?County adoption took place: ?State adoption took place: ?Country Adoption took place: USA ?Adoptive Mothers Name: ?Adoptive Mothers Maiden Name: ?Adoptive Fathers Name: ?Email Address: renee.lynne.ca@gmail.comSearching For: Adoptee, Birth BrotherAll Other Information: I'm an adoptee, born in Houston, TX, in 8-?-1961. I found and reunited with my birth families and just recently learned I have a birth brother or half-birth brother who was also given up for adoption. He was born the summer (maybe fall) of 1962. Maybe in the DFW, TX, area. I am searching for him. Our birth mother was 20 years old when she had me. She became pregnant again shortly after my birth, and gave birth to my birth brother (or half-birth brother) when she was 21 years old. She is originally from Huntsville, TX, and was attending SHSU when I was conceived. She has three sisters and one brother. Her father worked at SHSU. She is very tall and long-limbed and had brown eyes and dark brown hair (now silver). I am tall and had brown eyes and auburn hair (now silver). We were both quite skinny until we hit our fifties, and now we're both apple-shaped. I've tested at AncestryDNA, 23andMe, and FTDNA and have uploaded to GEDmatch. (Update) Birth mother was 5'10" tall, I am 5'9" tall, with brown eyes and I had dark auburn hair (it's silver now).Date Received: 3-10-2017Date Posted: 3-10-2017Last Updated: 3-12-2017