# Adoptee Birth Date: 5-28-1963 (2:50 a.m.)Adoptee Gender: FemaleAdoptee Birth Race: CaucasianName given to Adoptee by Birth Parents: Brenda Elaine VincentAdoptee Birth City: Pilot Point, TXAdoptee Birth County: Denton CountyAdoptee Birth State: TexasAdoptee Birth Country: USAAdoptee Birth Mothers Name: ?Adoptee Birth Mothers Maiden Name: ?Adoptee Birth Mothers Race: CaucasianAdoptee Birth Fathers Name: ?Adoptee Birth Fathers Race: CaucasianAdoptee Birth Hospital: Rest Cottage HospitalAdoption Agency or Attorney: Rest CottageAge of Adoptee when Adopted: 5 days oldName given to Adoptee by Adoptive Parents: Brenda Elaine VincentCity adoption took place: Denton, TXCounty adoption took place: Denton CountyState adoption took place: TexasCountry Adoption took place: USAAdoptive Mothers Name: Virginia Lee VincentAdoptive Mothers Maiden Name: VanceAdoptive Fathers Name: Everett Maurice VincentEmail Address: bd4hope@gmail.comSearching For: Birth Mother, Medical History.All Other Information: Born 2:50 a.m., attending physician Pedigo and Stella Wells, R.N. (Update) I think birth mother was 20 or 21 years old at time of birth. I believe she was 5'2" tall, with brown eyes and brown hair, she had asthma, wore glasses. Was a private nurse. Loved Chemistry and Math. I share the asthma trait but not the chemistry or math love. I am 5'4" tall, with blue eyes and blonde hair, it was brunette at birth but turned blonde. My birth father was 5'4 to 5'6" tall ?, with blue eyes and brown hair. Married at conception, divorced by birth. Worked at father's trucking firm. My birth mother was adopted too and her brother who may have been named Robert was in the Army and fought in Korea. Date Received: 8-25-2007Date Posted: 9-1-2007Last Updated: 10-5-2015 & 9-28-2015 & 9-1-2007Moved From Page #107 10-8-2007