# Adoptee Birth Date: 1-6-1962Adoptee Gender: MaleAdoptee Birth Race: CaucasianName given to Adoptee by Birth Parents: ?Adoptee Birth City: ?, TXAdoptee Birth County: ?Adoptee Birth State: Texas ?Adoptee Birth Country: USAAdoptee Birth Mothers Name: ?Adoptee Birth Mothers Maiden Name: ?Adoptee Birth Mothers Race: CaucasianAdoptee Birth Fathers Name: ?Adoptee Birth Fathers Race: CaucasianAdoptee Birth Hospital: ?Adoption Agency or Attorney: ?Age of Adoptee when Adopted: NewbornName given to Adoptee by Adoptive Parents: John Rhode FischerCity adoption took place: ?, TXCounty adoption took place: ?State adoption took place: TexasCountry Adoption took place: USAAdoptive Mothers Name: ?Adoptive Mothers Maiden Name: ?Adoptive Fathers Name: John FischerEmail Address: ivyjoe4563@gmail.comSearching For: Birth Father's Birth Family, Medical History.All Other Information: Adopted sisters names all the kids were adopted. oldest sister Jean Fischer-possibly married may be an anastesologist. Second sister Stephanie Hill (married name) Maiden is Fischer. His Adoptive father (John) has passed. I know that his Adoptive mom is still alive and last I knew she lived in georgetown, Texas. My Father is John Rhode Fischer (adopted) I know where he is sometimes, the last time I knew he was in Georgetown, Texas that was 6 years ago. He placed me for adoption and his family (mom sister) are not happy that I contact him. Infact his mom denies that I belong to the family. So my delima is that I would like to find his birth family to meet my family. So one more time I am looking for my Birth Father's John Rhode Fischer's Birth family.Date Received: 3-9-2010Date Posted: 3-10-2010Last Updated: 3-10-2010