# Adoptee Birth Date: 5-2-1962Adoptee Gender: MaleAdoptee Birth Race: WhiteName given to Adoptee by Birth Parents: ?Adoptee Birth City: Fort Worth, TXAdoptee Birth County: Tarrant CountyAdoptee Birth State: TexasAdoptee Birth Country: USAAdoptee Birth Mothers Name: ?Adoptee Birth Mothers Maiden Name: ?Adoptee Birth Mothers Race: WhiteAdoptee Birth Fathers Name: ?Adoptee Birth Fathers Race: WhiteAdoptee Birth Hospital: Volunteers of American Maternity Home-HospitalAdoption Agency or Attorney: Volunteers of America, Atty = J. Everett ClineAge of Adoptee when Adopted: 10-14 days old ?Name given to Adoptee by Adoptive Parents: William Robert Rowell, Jr.City adoption took place: Fort Worth, TXCounty adoption took place: Tarrant CountyState adoption took place: TexasCountry Adoption took place: USAAdoptive Mothers Name: Emmaleen Elizabeth RowellAdoptive Mothers Maiden Name: SlussarAdoptive Fathers Name: William Robert RowellEmail Address: arowell@tamu.eduSearching For: Birth Parents, Birth Family, Medical History.All Other Information: Adoptee searching for any members of my birth family. Adoption was granted 12-6-1962 in the 96th District Court, Tarrant County, State of Texas. Birth mother was born in Dallas, TX and was 21 years old at the time of birth (20 at time of intake). She entered the Volunteers of America Maternity Home in Fort Worth, Texas on 1-7-1962, where she resided until 5-12-1962 (10 days after delivery). She was described on the VOA Social History Resume as 5'8" tall, 190lbs, with hazel eyes and light brown hair, fair complexion, naturally curly hair and full lips. She was a hypochondria, and seemed "spoiled". She was a HS graduate, employed as a typist in the 10 months preceding discovery of the pregnancy. During those 10 months, she moved out of her family home and lived with a female roommate. She was in generally in good health, however she suffered from back issues from an acrobatic injury. Both the birth mother, her mother and her sister (who was 16 years old at the time of the birth mother's admission to the VOA) were all members of the Church of Christ. Adoptee's paternal grandfather: 52 years old at the time of birth mother's entry to the VOA home. He was 5'11: tall, 185 lbs. He had a 9th grade education and was an electrician. He was Presbyterian. Adoptee's paternal great grandfather was 83 years old at intake and thought to live in California. Adoptee's paternal great grandmother was in good health until a heart attack which claimed her life. Adoptee's maternal grandmother was 46 years old at the time of intake, 5'6" tall, 190 lbs., HS grad, housewife. Adoptee's material great grandfather was 71 years old at intake, 5'10" tall, was a janitor / custodian when in good health, and had a leg amputated during the birth mother's stay at VOA. Adoptee's maternal great grandmother: died during surgery (unknown cause), had 2 sisters who line in XXX and Arizona. One was divorced, both were HS graduates. Both parents were described as cooperative and it was determined that they shared a close family relationship. Alleged birth father was 27 years old, stationed at XX base. Angle, previously divorced w/2 children, and remarried before this birth. 5'11" tall, 200 lbs., with blue eyes, played the piano and organ, good looking, like to hunt, fish and tinker with his car. Birth mother and alleged birth father dated for approx. 6 months before breaking up. Birth mother later discovered that she was pregnant and when she told the alleged birth father, he told her he had remarried in the time that they had been broken up.Date Received: 5-1-2017Date Posted: 5-2-2017Last Updated: 5-2-2017