# Adoptee Birth Date: 1-24-1963Adoptee Gender: MaleAdoptee Birth Race: ?Name given to Adoptee by Birth Parents: Timothy Wayne Bonneville ?Adoptee Birth City: Houston, TXAdoptee Birth County: Harris CountyAdoptee Birth State: TexasAdoptee Birth Country: USAAdoptee Birth Mothers Name: Florine / Lorraine Berniece Lindsey, ManessAdoptee Birth Mothers Maiden Name: KolbAdoptee Birth Mothers Race: ?Adoptee Birth Fathers Name: Harry Bonneville ?Adoptee Birth Fathers Race: ?Adoptee Birth Hospital: Jefferson Davis (Most Likely Due To Indigent Mother) Or St JosephAdoption Agency or Attorney: ?Age of Adoptee when Adopted: ?Name given to Adoptee by Adoptive Parents: ?City adoption took place: Houston, TXCounty adoption took place: Harris CountyState adoption took place: TexasCountry Adoption took place: USAAdoptive Mothers Name: ?Adoptive Mothers Maiden Name: ?Adoptive Fathers Name: ?Email Address: vinsontrng@aol.comSearching For: Adoptee, My Biological Brother Named Timothy Wayne. He Was Adopted At 3 Months Of AgeAll Other Information: Timothy has 3 older sisters and 1 older brother. He may have been adopted with one sister, Robin Scott (Not sure if this is her last or middle name). She was about 18 - 24 months old and would have been born in probably 4-?-1961 to 9-?-1961. No record of the birth of these two can be found, so the records were evidently changed at the time of adoption. The other two older sisters (I am one) were adopted into one family together. The older brother remained with the bio mother and was not removed from the home (he was 5 years old and staying with relatives). All three girls along with Timothy Wayne were given away in ?-?-1963 by the bio mother . Timothy Wayne was taken to Louisiana by a woman who used to baby sit for the bio mother. When authorities were notified by suspicious friends of the babysitter when she showed up with a baby, she was arrested and so was the mother, after she revealed the mother! had given him to her. This was about 2-?-1963 or 3-?-1963 or 4-?-1963. A mention of these non-identifying details were found in an article in the Houston Chronicle Newspaper. The article indicated Timothy was returned to Houston where he and his three sisters were placed at Burnett Bayland county Orphanage for Girls and Burnett Bayland county Orphanage for Boys. These facilities were next door to one another on Chimney Rock Rd in Houston, Texas. They were large two story mansions back then, but have since been revamped as modern one story multi-building facilities. As one of the older sisters, I have personal knowledge of these facts and remember being at the orphanage as a child and revisiting as an adult. When placed there in ?-?-1963, we were not allowed contact with either Timothy or Robin. We were told by a staff member they were adopted within a month and may have gone to the same family. However, the news article indicated a wealthy Childless couple expressed interest in Robin. The babysitter was quoted as saying she wanted to adopt Timothy, however I do not even know her name and it is unknown if she was allowed to do so. I have had contact with the bio mother who is unable or unwilling to give me any information. From my memory (I was 7 years old, my older sister was 8), Robin was olive complected, had brown eyes, and medium brown curls. Her father was most likely Hispanic, but could have been a man named Joe or possibly J.V. Maness. The bio mother was married and had a son with J.V. Maness, but I am not certain he is the same person as the dark haired man named Joe. Timothy was blonde, blue-eyed and very pale. It is certain he had a Caucasian father. I remember him being called Timothy Wayne Bonneville and I remember an older man by the name of Harry Bonneville who stayed with us.&nbs! p; I remember Robin being called only as Robin Scott, so it is quite possible this is her last name. I have also had contact with the bio brother (blonde, blue-eyed) who was not removed from the home. As a child, I had brown eyes, blonde hair. My older sister had blue eyes, brown hair. The bio mother is blue-eyed with auburn hair. She was born in ?-?-1925 and is still living. Date Received: 10-5-2006Date Posted: 10-6-2006Last Updated: 10-6-2006Moved From Page #107 10-8-2007