# Adoptee Birth Date: 11-21-1960 (3:26 a.m.)Adoptee Gender: FemaleAdoptee Birth Race: WhiteName given to Adoptee by Birth Parents: ?Adoptee Birth City: Dallas, TXAdoptee Birth County: Dallas CountyAdoptee Birth State: TexasAdoptee Birth Country: USAAdoptee Birth Mothers Name: Audrey Ardell Nichols ((FOUND))Adoptee Birth Mothers Maiden Name: ?Adoptee Birth Mothers Race: WhiteAdoptee Birth Fathers Name: ?Adoptee Birth Fathers Race: WhiteAdoptee Birth Hospital: Methodist Hospital of DallasAdoption Agency or Attorney: ?Age of Adoptee when Adopted: InfantName given to Adoptee by Adoptive Parents: Ellen Sue KarelitzCity adoption took place: ?County adoption took place: ?State adoption took place: ?Country Adoption took place: USAAdoptive Mothers Name: Rebecca KarelitzAdoptive Mothers Maiden Name: Franklin (Frankel on birth cert)Adoptive Fathers Name: Carl KarelitzEmail Address: ellenparker1@yahoo.comSearching For: Birth Father, Medical History.All Other Information: I was born in Texas but raised in Brooklyn, New York. My adoptive father picked me up in Texas and took me home to NY. They never told me I was adopted. I found out from neighbors at my mother's funeral. I am almost 50 years old now and was hoping to find one or both of my birth parents still alive or any information regarding who they are or were. (Update) I have dark blonde hair and olive green eyes. (Update) Audrey Ardell Nichols is the birth mother listed on the document. She was 18 when I was born @ Methodist Hospital of Dallas. It shows her birthpace as Florida but usual address of birth mother shows 911 St. Joseph, Dallas. It also says 'not a farm'. No father's name is listed. I was born @3:26 a.m. and no other children previously born to this birth mother.Date Received: 11-6-2010Date Posted: 11-7-2010Last Updated: 11-25-2010