# Adoptee Birth Date: 8-?-1961 ?Adoptee Gender: FemaleAdoptee Birth Race: CaucasianName given to Adoptee by Birth Parents: ?Adoptee Birth City: Fort Worth, TXAdoptee Birth County: Tarrant CountyAdoptee Birth State: TexasAdoptee Birth Country: USAAdoptee Birth Mothers Name: Sandra Lee McClureAdoptee Birth Mothers Maiden Name: WestAdoptee Birth Mothers Race: CaucasianAdoptee Birth Fathers Name: Wendell SandersAdoptee Birth Fathers Race: CaucasianAdoptee Birth Hospital: ?Adoption Agency or Attorney: Homestead Maternity HomeAge of Adoptee when Adopted: Given up at birthName given to Adoptee by Adoptive Parents: ?City adoption took place: ?, TX ?County adoption took place: ?State adoption took place: Texas ?Country Adoption took place: USAAdoptive Mothers Name: ?Adoptive Mothers Maiden Name: ?Adoptive Fathers Name: ?Email Address: tammyjo1102@yahoo.comSearching For: Adoptee, Birth Sibling SisterAll Other Information: I am a birth sister / birth sibling I am searching for my sister.We do not know her exact Date of Birth we know the year was ?-?-1961 and according to Grandmother ''' flowers were in bloom'''.Maternal Grandfather did all arrangements kept his wife and everyone else in the dark about the upcoming birth of this child and all arrangements. Birth Uncle kept in contact with his Sister during her stay and Birth.he has Passed away Due to Heart Disease and Heart Attack . We have Diabetes in the family Maternal side my self Tammy,Grandmother aunt,and older Sister.our older Brother was recently Diagnosed with Dementia he is a few years older than the Birth Sister we are searching for..We also have High Blood Pressure and other serious ailment's we need to contact her for Medical reason as well as family reasons. We found out about my Birth Sister after the Death of our Mother who died of Brain Cancer due to 4 Tumors the Grandfather has passed away due to Cancer as well..The Birth Father is Deceased from information from grandmother,his name Wendell Sanders in or near Burnett Texas. Birth Mother Deceased 6-28-1982. We had been contacted by a Lady named Charlotte Jennings from Oklahoma who said she was in same home with Birth Mother at the time of her stay. She said she would tell us who our sister was. We asked if she could call us back that we needed to speak with family members about it. She never called back. We had originally thought that our mother and Birth Sister were in the Edna Gladney Home and we were later told it was not true. We could get no info from there. We spoke to Pat Molina who told us that it was from '' Homestead '' . We were told that if we sent in Death Certificate we could get a birth date, that's what Pat Molina said. She gave us a Birth Date of 10-16-1961 but we spoke again and she said she never gave us this date and did not know why we were searching this date. Birth Mothers Date Of Birth is 10-15-1941 her Maiden Name was West her married name McClure.Date Received: 7-19-2008Date Posted: 7-23-2008 Last Updated: 8-12-2008 & 7-23-2008