# Adoptee Birth Date: 3-27-1963 (6:13 p.m.)Adoptee Gender: FemaleAdoptee Birth Race: White ?Name given to Adoptee by Birth Parents: ?Adoptee Birth City: Ft. Worth, TXAdoptee Birth County: Tarrant CountyAdoptee Birth State: TexasAdoptee Birth Country: USAAdoptee Birth Mothers Name: ?Adoptee Birth Mothers Maiden Name: ?Adoptee Birth Mothers Race: ?Adoptee Birth Fathers Name: ?Adoptee Birth Fathers Race: WhiteAdoptee Birth Hospital: Harris MethodistAdoption Agency or Attorney: Homestead MaternityAge of Adoptee when Adopted: 3 days old ?Name given to Adoptee by Adoptive Parents: Michelle Annette JohnsonCity adoption took place: Ft. Worth, TXCounty adoption took place: Tarrant CountyState adoption took place: TexasCountry Adoption took place: USAAdoptive Mothers Name: Yvonne Annette JohnsonAdoptive Mothers Maiden Name: BoothAdoptive Fathers Name: Walter Edwin JohnsonEmail Address: erin.steez@yahoo.comSearching For: Medical History, Genealogy Records, Biological Ties.All Other Information: Adoptive parents and their families originally from Ft. Worth, Dallas, TX. Adoptive parents living in Houston at the time of adoption. I have a certificate of birth from Harris Hospital with feet print stating I was born at 6:13 p.m. on Wednesday 3-27-1963 weighing 5 lbs. 7 ozs. and 17 inches. My birth certificate #142-63-051297 (adoptive one) with 20a. 2507? issued The Adoption was granted on 10-4-1963 in Tarrant County in the 96th District Court with a Cause No. 31239-C. I was given no other information than that nor will be. I am 48 years old, 5'6" tall, 120 lbs, with black hair and brown eyes. I have fair to medium skin tone, which some have described as olive skin. I have a bit of an ethnic look, but no one can seem to put their finger on it. I was told many things about my heritage, none which makes any sense, so still guessing. I was born with a mongolian spot on my tail bone which is very faint today. Date Received: 7-10-2011Date Posted: 8-2-2011Last Updated: 8-17-2011