# Adoptee Birth Date: 8-17-1961 (4:55 p.m.)Adoptee Gender: MaleAdoptee Birth Race: WhiteName given to Adoptee by Birth Parents: ?Adoptee Birth City: Abilene, TXAdoptee Birth County: Taylor CountyAdoptee Birth State: TexasAdoptee Birth Country: USAAdoptee Birth Mothers Name: Patricia Ann Stephens ((FOUND)) (Deceased)Adoptee Birth Mothers Maiden Name: ?Adoptee Birth Mothers Race: White ?Adoptee Birth Fathers Name: ?Adoptee Birth Fathers Race: White ?Adoptee Birth Hospital: Hospital in Abilene, TexasAdoption Agency or Attorney: Child Welfare ServicesAge of Adoptee when Adopted: 2 or 3 days after bornName given to Adoptee by Adoptive Parents: John McKim Bridges IIICity adoption took place: Abilene, TXCounty adoption took place: Taylor CountyState adoption took place: TexasCountry Adoption took place: USAAdoptive Mothers Name: Edna BridgesAdoptive Mothers Maiden Name: PurcellAdoptive Fathers Name: John McKim Bridges Jr. (Deceased)Email Address: jkbridges@jbridges.netSearching For: Birth Father, Birth Sibling, Medical History, Ethnicity History.All Other Information: Dr. R. Lee Rode, M.D. was the delivery physician. Born 8-17-1961 @ 4:55 p.m. I was told that I was adopted through Child Welfare Services. Birth mother and birth father were in college. I was told that the birth mother's father was a Baptist Preacher in or around Abilene, TX. I was told for years by adoptive parents that the attending delivery nurse was my birth mothers sister or related to my birth mother. However, my adoptive father has passed away and my adoptive mother is 89 and is now saying that she is not sure if this information is correct. (Update) The ages of the birth mother and birth father are unknown. However, we've been told that they were both attending college when she became pregnant. John is 5'8" tall, he has blue eyes and blonde hair. We have no other info on birth parents. (Update) Birth father was a native of Tennessee.Date Received: 10-22-2012Date Posted: 10-24-2012Last Updated: 1-24-2013 & 11-2-2012