# Adoptee Birth Date: 5-8-1962Adoptee Gender: FemaleAdoptee Birth Race: CaucasianName given to Adoptee by Birth Parents: ?Adoptee Birth City: San Antonio, TXAdoptee Birth County: Bexar CountyAdoptee Birth State: TexasAdoptee Birth Country: USAAdoptee Birth Mothers Name: Donna Joann Karr Felger Adoptee Birth Mothers Maiden Name: ?Adoptee Birth Mothers Race: Caucasian ?Adoptee Birth Fathers Name: ?Adoptee Birth Fathers Race: Caucasian ?Adoptee Birth Hospital: ?Adoption Agency or Attorney: ?Age of Adoptee when Adopted: 22 months old ?Name given to Adoptee by Adoptive Parents: Penny Lou StobaughCity adoption took place: San Antonio, TXCounty adoption took place: Bexar CountyState adoption took place: TexasCountry Adoption took place: USAAdoptive Mothers Name: Louise Ardena StobaughAdoptive Mothers Maiden Name: Pruett or Pruitt ?Adoptive Fathers Name: William Louis StobaughEmail Address: pennystobaugh62@gmail.comSearching For: Medical History, Closure.All Other Information: (Update) I am 5'3" tall, 110 lbs., lots of freckles, with marine green eyes and dishwater blonde hair. I am doing DNA testing with Ancestry. (Update) Birth mother was 18 years old at time of birth. She had 4 children. The 1st child was born when the birth mother was 14 years old and unmarried. This child was placed in adoption. Of the 3 remaining children, 2 are with the birth mother. The birth mother comes from an economically and socially deprived Anglo family from a rural community in Missouri. Birth father was 25 years old, he was described as unstable, a heavy drinker, an unfaithful spouse. His marriage to the birth mother was his 2nd marriage. It is reported he does not support his children. His occupation was laboratory technician. His parents live in Ohio. The birth father was allegedly "kicked out" of the Service.Date Received: 2-20-2020Date Posted: 2-20-2020Last Updated: 5-24-2020 &4-15-2020 & 3-26-2020 & 2-21-2020