# Adoptee Birth Date: 5-7-1963Adoptee Gender: FemaleAdoptee Birth Race: CaucasianName given to Adoptee by Birth Parents: Jennifer Lee (unknown last)Adoptee Birth City: San Antonio, TXAdoptee Birth County: Bexar CountyAdoptee Birth State: TexasAdoptee Birth Country: USAAdoptee Birth Mothers Name: ?Adoptee Birth Mothers Maiden Name: ?Adoptee Birth Mothers Race: CaucasianAdoptee Birth Fathers Name: ?Adoptee Birth Fathers Race: CaucasianAdoptee Birth Hospital: San Antonio, TXAdoption Agency or Attorney: Lutheran Social Services AgencyAge of Adoptee when Adopted: 12 weeks oldName given to Adoptee by Adoptive Parents: Leanne Frances VogtCity adoption took place: El Paso, TXCounty adoption took place: Travis CountyState adoption took place: TexasCountry Adoption took place: USAAdoptive Mothers Name: Frances Lorraine VogtAdoptive Mothers Maiden Name: SpearAdoptive Fathers Name: John Lawrence VogtEmail Address: loveleejewelery@gmail.comSearching For: Birth Parents, Medical History.All Other Information: Searching for birth parents, they were originally from Kentucky, they were unmarried. At the time, the only child for either. Birth mother moved to San Antonio, TX to a maternity home 1-30-1963 in order to hide pregnancy. She continued on to Dallas after my birth. She was 28 years old 5'4" tall, 115 lbs. with dark eyes and dark hair, med. complexion. High school some college education and was employed. She was an only child. Birth father desired a golf career. (Update) My birth father was 6' tall, 155 lbs. with blue eyes and fair skin. His age and hair color are unknown to me. That is stated in a translation of my file by a social worker from Lutheran Social Services Agency upon my request for information. I am 5'4" tall, with dark brown eyes and dark brown hair.Date Received: 3-25-2015Date Posted: 3-26-2015Last Updated: 3-27-2015