# Adoptee Birth Date: 7-30-1960Adoptee Gender: FemaleAdoptee Birth Race: WhiteName given to Adoptee by Birth Parents: Jimmie Darlene WhiteAdoptee Birth City: Dallas, TXAdoptee Birth County: Dallas CountyAdoptee Birth State: TexasAdoptee Birth Country: USAAdoptee Birth Mothers Name: Lois Delores WhiteAdoptee Birth Mothers Maiden Name: SmithAdoptee Birth Mothers Race: WhiteAdoptee Birth Fathers Name: Charlie Eugene WhiteAdoptee Birth Fathers Race: WhiteAdoptee Birth Hospital: Methodist Hospital of DallasAdoption Agency or Attorney: Warren PruittAge of Adoptee when Adopted: 4 days oldName given to Adoptee by Adoptive Parents: Mary Jayne MaxonCity adoption took place: Vernon, TXCounty adoption took place: Wilbarger CountyState adoption took place: TexasCountry Adoption took place: USAAdoptive Mothers Name: Betty MaxonAdoptive Mothers Maiden Name: HornbeakAdoptive Fathers Name: George E. Maxon Jr.Email Address: jimmiedarlene@hotmail.comSearching For: Birth Parents, Birth Sibling, Medical History.All Other Information: On birth certificate birth mother's age states 30 born in Arkansas and birth fathers age 40 born in Louisana and was a driver for a freight company. Birth mother address listed at time of birth of 1400 Small St. Grand Prairie, Texas Dallas County. Birth mother handed me over to the attorney and his wife complete with baby blanket and baby bag with bottles. Mr. Pruitt asked her if he could give her a ride and she said no she had one. She was said to have porcline skin and I have extremely white skin. Her fingers were noted to be long and skinny like she played the piano. I play and was a vocal major in college. My mother signed a paper stating she had me out of wedlock but when she signed the document she signed her name Delores White. It was my understanding that my parents weren't married and that's why I was given up. On my birth certificate it also says the "informant" was Mrs. C. E. White which would be my fathers name. My adoptive parents were in the Air Force. my birth number is 142-60-138171Date Received: 3-28-2008Date Posted: 4-8-2008Last Updated: 6-9-2018 & 4-8-2008If This Is You Please Update Your E-mail E-mail Me Atgary@gsadoptionregistry.com