# Adoptee Birth Date: 11-18-1961 (7:40 p.m.)Adoptee Gender: FemaleAdoptee Birth Race: ?Name given to Adoptee by Birth Parents: “Gabriela” or “Gabriella” ?Adoptee Birth City: Houston, TX Adoptee Birth County: Harris County Adoptee Birth State: Texas Adoptee Birth Country: USAAdoptee Birth Mothers Name: ?Adoptee Birth Mothers Maiden Name: ?Adoptee Birth Mothers Race: ?Adoptee Birth Fathers Name: ?Adoptee Birth Fathers Race: ?Adoptee Birth Hospital: ?Adoption Agency or Attorney: Depelchin Faith HomeAge of Adoptee when Adopted: ?Name given to Adoptee by Adoptive Parents: Sally Lea PickeringCity adoption took place: Houston, TXCounty adoption took place: Harris CountyState adoption took place: TexasCountry Adoption took place: USAAdoptive Mothers Name: Vernalea Pickering Adoptive Mothers Maiden Name: ?Adoptive Fathers Name: Billy Russell Pickering Email Address: sally.nelezen@sbcglobal.netSearching For: Birth Parent(s), Medical History. All Other Information: I was born in Houston, Texas at 7:40 p.m. The birth number is 142-61-209211 , although I have a certified copy and the information shown is for my adoptive parents, not my birth mother or father. There is also a number next to the time of birth, "file number" 24782. I don't know what this number is, but it might be of importance. Although my hair is now brown, as a child it was blonde and I have blue eyes and fair skin. What little information Depelchin furnished said my mother had brown hair and blue eyes, was 5'2" tall and weighed apr. 110 lbs. My maternal grandmother had red hair and fair skin. My birth father had dark hair and eyes. I was adopted through DePelchin Faith Home in Houston, Texas. I was told that my birth mother was 14 years old and that my birth father was younger. They met in music class, but my birth mother would / could not furnish additional information about my birth father. I have been told that I was named "Gabriella" by my birth mother, although this is not in any written documentation. I was adopted into a wonderful family and have had a wonderful life, which includes a child of my own. As I enter my forties, I am interested in obtaining some type of medical history for my own personal knowledge, as well as for my child. My child's father was also adopted and has no medical history, so my child also has no history. In this day and time of medical advances, with so much based on genetics, I would like some information so that when the doctor asks if I "have a history of....." I can give an accurate answer. Since I was given up by a very young birth mother, I can understand that she may have "moved on" with her life and others may not know about me. At the same time, as a mother I cannot fathom having a child and not wondering if they are happy and healthy. I am both happy and healthy and simply want to tell my birth mother "thank you" for having enough love in her heart to do what was best for me and my future. At the same time, I would be happy to meet either of my birth parents, or others from my birth family if so desired. She is listed in birth books under ammended name. Date Received: 6-9-2005 Date Posted: 6-9-2005 Last Updated: 11-13-2012 & 4-8-2008 & 6-9-2005Moved From Page #107 10-8-2007