# Re-entry

Recently a news item about the Gamestop short squeeze caught my attention. A bunch of Redditors on a subreddit named 'WallStreetBets' had been collectively moving into Gamestop stock positions and eventually became a huge surge of purchasing. Millions of board members were purchasing mostly small amounts, but it had begun pushing the stock up. When this surge started hurting some large hedge funds with short positions they were forced to unwind, which means buying the stock, which pushed the price up even more. A classic short squeeze, brought on by a rag-tag group of random people.

I was intrigued, and it also sounded fun, so I tried to participate in it via the RobinHood app but the delay in getting funded from my bank account killed most of the momentum. I did manage to buy a few shares in my brokerage account, but the fun of learning about RobinHood and how the app works was spoiled. After my deposit was acknowledged by the app, I got credit for it and the ability to buy. I put in orders for AMC and BB, but when the market opened my orders never filled. As it turns out, RobinHood and several other platforms had halted trading on most of these volatile stocks being marauded by the Redditors. In RobinHood's case, you could sell them all you wanted, you just couldn't buy any more. After the day's session ended, this restriction was released. As soon as I was allowed I cancelled my transactions and cancelled the fund transfer. For the stocks I had purchased through Schwab, I held for a couple of days and then sold all. i made a few bucks, but not enough to move the needle on my tax return.

In the meantime, I explored the GME/WSB communities via Reddit and Twitter. At one point someone (possibly one of the Winklevoss twins) mentioned that one way to avoid getting shut out of a trading opportunity similar to what happened with RobinHood was to use a network/system that was distributed, like Bitcoin.

Bing! Kind of a lightbulb moment. I was obviously looking for more 'fun' in my investing, vs. my usual boring old index funds. Bitcoin sounded fun, for many reasons. So I began looking into it again to see if I could transfer my renewed interest in some speculation on the side into actual money.