In 1998 we decided to take a vacation. We somehow managed to get our schedules lined up to both get the same week off from work, and then proceeded to plan as much vacation as we could possibly fit into those nine days. We crammed luggage and camping gear into my Honda Civic and left after work on Friday. We made it from Fort Worth, Texas to Little Rock, Arkansas before we stopped for the night. We saved time and money by sleeping in a convenience store parking lot.

Over the next nine days we made it as far as Philadelphia, then turned south and went to North Carolina to visit family. We returned through Atlanta, then took I-20 back home. We saw sights and landmarks in Memphis, we stayed with an acquaintance just east of Dollywood in Tennessee, in the foothills of the Smoky Mountains. We camped near Valley Forge and saw the Liberty Bell. We visited Williamsburg. We visited the graveyards of my ancestors in Pennsylvania, Delaware and North Carolina. We squeezed a whole lot of activity into the available time.

While we were in Philadelphia we even entertained the possibility of going on up to New York City. It was only two hours away, but it would have required an additional day if we were to actually see anything. We didn't have time to do it justice, given the rest of our schedule. It was a wonderful, tiring trip. I don't regret any of it. However -- we definitely would have rearranged our itinerary if we had known the future. But that's just it about the future. It is unknowable. The only thing you can say for sure about it is that it is uncertain. There are no guarantees. 

New York City has a hundred things to see and do. Most of them are considered landmarks, monuments. They are just there. Plays and musicals come and go, but Broadway will always be there, right? Coney Island can wait. The museums and landmark buildings are something you can count on, just waiting for you to someday visit. But then the unexpected happens, and the skyline changes forever and now you can only look at old photos and imagine what the NYC skyline used to look like before the World Trade Center twin towers were erased forever. We did not know this in 1998 and we missed our chance to see them, forever.

In 2002 we flew in and spent ten days in New York. We timed our trip to enjoy a swing dancing event and the dedication of a historical plaque at the site of the old Savoy ballroom. As it turns out, it was also the one-year anniversary of 9/11 and we watched the last beam being removed from ground zero. We walked past a nearby fire station holding a memorial service and heard their bell ringing out over and over, one bell for each member of their station who died that day.

There are so many things in this world that we take for granted, that we think are permanent. None of them are. The World Trade Center was impressive from an architectural viewpoint, but I wouldn't put it on the same level as, say, the pyramids in Egypt, or Niagara Falls, or a tall Sequoia, or a tree thousands of years old. Those are the things that truly impress me, the wonders of the natural world. Sometimes those things seem rather permanent as well, their life-cycles much longer than human structures. But they, too, can disappear.